.TH roe 1 "2026" "roe 1.0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
roe \- a disassembler fit for humans
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B roe
.I file
.br
.B roe
.I file symbol
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B roe
.I file
.B \-\-section
.I name
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B roe
.I file
.RB { \-\-all | \-D }
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B roe
.I file
.RB { \-\-headers | \-\-sections | \-\-segments | \-\-imports | \-\-exports }
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B roe
.I file
.B \-\-addr
.I hex
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B roe
.B \-\-raw\-bytes
.B \-\-arch
.I name
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B roe
.I file
.B \-\-diff
.I other
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B roe
.B \-\-completions
.I shell
.br
.B roe
.RB { \-\-help | \-h }
.RI [ topic ]
.br
.B roe
.RB { \-\-version | \-V }
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B roe
is a command\-line disassembler that aims to make machine code readable by
people rather than only by other tools. It reads an object file, executable,
shared library, or static archive member, disassembles it with the Capstone
engine, and prints output that preserves addresses, resolves symbols and
relocations to their names, labels branch targets, and previews the
destinations of in\-function jumps and calls inline. Raw instruction bytes are
hidden by default and shown only on request.
.PP
With no symbol argument,
.B roe
lists the functions discovered in
.IR file .
Given a symbol, it disassembles that single function with cross\-function calls
resolved to symbol names, relocations annotated inline by name, and local
branches rewritten as readable labels. ELF, Mach\-O (x86\-64 and ARM64, thin and
fat), and PE/COFF (x86, x86\-64, and ARM64;
.B .exe
and
.BR .dll )
are parsed directly. Static archives are detected but not parsed.
.PP
Beyond disassembly,
.B roe
can inspect a file without listing instructions: summarize the header with
.BR \-\-headers ,
list
.BR \-\-sections ", " \-\-segments ", " \-\-imports ", or " \-\-exports ,
hex\-dump a region with
.BR \-\-hex ,
extract printable
.B \-\-strings
together with the instruction that references each, fuzzy\-search symbols with
.BR \-\-find ,
and diff two binaries function by function with
.BR \-\-diff .
Code can also be disassembled by address with
.BR \-\-addr " or " \-\-range ,
or read from standard input with
.BR \-\-raw\-bytes .
.PP
The tool was prompted by Linus Torvalds in the Linux kernel mailing list
thread
.RB \(lq "odd objtool \(aqunreachable instruction\(aq warning" \(rq
(29 October 2025), where he observed that
.BR objdump (1)
flags are hard to remember, that its output trades readability against
information, that relocations are printed as raw addresses instead of symbol
names, and that there is no way to preview the target of a jump or call. His
summary was that the output is
.RB \(lq "not fit for humans" \(rq .
The name
.B roe
and this manual are a direct response to that complaint.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-addr " hex"
Disassemble starting at the given address and continue until a return or
other terminal instruction is reached, or until an internal cap is hit. Works
on stripped binaries, where no symbol marks the function boundary.
.TP
.B \-\-all ", " \-D
Disassemble every executable section instead of listing functions.
.TP
.BI \-\-arch " name"
Override the detected architecture. Useful for code the container cannot
disambiguate, for example
.B thumb
or
.BR riscv64 .
Required with
.BR \-\-raw\-bytes .
.TP
.BI \-\-base " hex"
Base address to assign to the bytes read with
.BR \-\-raw\-bytes .
Defaults to 0.
.TP
.BI \-\-bytes " n"
Number of bytes to dump when
.B \-\-hex
is combined with
.BR \-\-addr .
Defaults to 64.
.TP
.BI \-\-calls " symbol"
List only the functions that call or branch to
.IR symbol .
.TP
.BI \-\-completions " shell"
Emit a shell completion script to standard output and exit. The argument is
one of
.BR bash ", " zsh ", " fish ", or " powershell .
.TP
.BI \-\-contains " string"
List only the functions whose body references the given
.IR string .
.TP
.BI \-\-diff " other"
Compare the current file against
.I other
and report a function\-level diff: functions added, removed, changed, and the
count left unchanged. When a symbol argument is also given, emit a per\-function
unified diff of that one function instead. The summary form honors
.BR \-\-json .
.TP
.B \-\-exports
List the symbols the file exports, each with its address.
.TP
.BI \-\-find " pattern"
Search every symbol table for
.I pattern
with a case\-insensitive fuzzy match, covering the symbol table, dynamic symbol
table, imports, exports, and demangled names. Each match is tagged with its
source as
.BR [symtab] ", " [dynsym] ", " [import] ", or " [export] .
.TP
.BI \-\-grep " regex"
List only the functions whose name matches the given regular expression.
.TP
.B \-\-headers
Print a summary of the file header: container format, architecture, object
type, entry point, and endianness.
.TP
.B \-\-help ", " \-h " [\fItopic\fP]"
Show help and exit. An optional
.I topic
selects a focused page; topics are
.BR usage ", " formats ", " arches ", " examples ", " config ", and " json .
.TP
.B \-\-hex " [\fIsection\fP]"
Print a hexadecimal and ASCII dump. With a
.I section
name, dump that section; otherwise dump the region selected by
.B \-\-addr
or
.BR \-\-range .
When dumping at an address, the length is governed by
.BR \-\-bytes .
.TP
.B \-\-hex\-input
Force the bytes read with
.B \-\-raw\-bytes
to be interpreted as hexadecimal text. Without this flag the input format is
auto\-detected.
.TP
.B \-\-imports
List the symbols the file imports, grouped by the library that provides them.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit machine\-readable JSON instead of formatted text. Combine with
.B \-\-no\-color
when piping to other programs.
.TP
.BI \-\-min\-len " n"
Minimum length of a run of printable characters that
.B \-\-strings
reports. Defaults to 4.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Disable ANSI color in the output, as for pipes and log files. Color is also
disabled when the
.B NO_COLOR
environment variable is set.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-pager
Do not page long output through the pager. Paging is also disabled when the
.B NO_PAGER
environment variable is set or when output is not a terminal.
.TP
.B \-\-quiet ", " \-q
Produce bare output suitable for pipelines, omitting headers, the banner, and
other decoration.
.TP
.BI \-\-range " start\-end"
Disassemble the inclusive address range from
.I start
to
.IR end .
.TP
.B \-\-raw\-bytes
Disassemble bytes read from standard input rather than a file. Requires
.BR \-\-arch .
The input is auto\-detected as hexadecimal text or raw binary;
.B \-\-hex\-input
forces hexadecimal. Use
.B \-\-base
to set the starting address.
.TP
.BI \-\-section " name"
Disassemble the named section, for example
.IR .text ", instead of listing functions."
.TP
.B \-\-sections
List the sections in the file, each with its name, size, permissions, and
file offset.
.TP
.B \-\-segments
List the program\-level layout: ELF program headers, Mach\-O load commands, or
PE data directories.
.TP
.B \-\-show\-bytes
Show the raw instruction bytes alongside each instruction. Bytes are hidden
by default.
.TP
.B \-\-source
Interleave source lines drawn from debug information with the disassembly.
.TP
.B \-\-stats
Print per\-function statistics: size, basic block count, branch count, and
nesting depth.
.TP
.B \-\-strings
Extract runs of printable characters at least
.B \-\-min\-len
bytes long (4 by default) and, for each, show the instruction that references
it or
.RB \(lq "(no xref found)" \(rq
when none does.
.TP
.B \-\-verbose ", " \-v
Print extra context, such as raw bytes and resolver provenance. Repeating the
flag,
.BR "\-v \-v" ,
adds debug diagnostics on standard error.
.TP
.B \-\-version ", " \-V
Show the version together with build information, supported architectures,
and recognized formats, then exit.
.TP
.B \-\-watch
Re\-run automatically whenever the input file changes on disk.
.TP
.BI \-\-xref " symbol"
Show every call site of
.IR symbol .
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
List the functions in a binary:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
roe vmlinux.o
.EE
.RE
.PP
Disassemble a single function with resolved symbols, labeled branches, and
inline previews:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
roe vmlinux.o handle_mm_fault
.EE
.RE
.PP
Disassemble a named section:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
roe a.out \-\-section .text
.EE
.RE
.PP
Disassemble every executable section:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
roe a.out \-\-all
.EE
.RE
.PP
Emit JSON and post\-process it with
.BR jq (1):
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
roe a.out main \-\-json \-\-no\-color | jq .
.EE
.RE
.PP
Find C++ methods by matching the function names against a regular expression:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
roe libfoo.so \-\-grep \(aq::\(aq
.EE
.RE
.PP
Show every call site of a symbol:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
roe a.out \-\-xref malloc
.EE
.RE
.PP
Report per\-function statistics:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
roe a.out \-\-stats
.EE
.RE
.PP
Show raw instruction bytes for one function:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
roe a.out main \-\-show\-bytes
.EE
.RE
.PP
Interleave source lines from debug information:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
roe a.out main \-\-source
.EE
.RE
.PP
Disassemble a stripped function starting at an address:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
roe a.out \-\-addr 0x4012a0
.EE
.RE
.PP
List the imported symbols grouped by their providing library:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
roe a.out \-\-imports
.EE
.RE
.PP
Hex\-dump a section:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
roe a.out \-\-hex .rodata
.EE
.RE
.PP
Diff two binaries function by function:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
roe new.bin \-\-diff old.bin
.EE
.RE
.PP
Disassemble raw bytes piped on standard input:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
echo \(aq55 48 89 e5 c3\(aq | roe \-\-raw\-bytes \-\-arch x86_64
.EE
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Usage error, such as an unknown flag or a missing argument.
.TP
.B 2
File or format error, such as a missing file or an unrecognized container.
.TP
.B 3
Disassembly error, such as a failure in the disassembler or symbol resolver.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
When set to any value, disable ANSI color, as with
.BR \-\-no\-color .
.TP
.B NO_PAGER
When set to any value, disable the pager, as with
.BR \-\-no\-pager .
.TP
.B PAGER
The pager command used for long output. Defaults to
.BR "less \-R" .
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Base directory for configuration. The configuration file is read from
.IR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/roe/config.toml ,
defaulting to
.I ~/.config/roe/config.toml
when unset.
.TP
.B ROE_CONFIG
Explicit path to the configuration file, overriding the search based on
.BR XDG_CONFIG_HOME .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/roe/config.toml
Per\-user configuration file on Linux. When
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is unset the path is
.IR ~/.config/roe/config.toml .
On macOS the file is
.I ~/Library/Application Support/roe/config.toml
and on Windows it is
.IR %APPDATA%\eroe\econfig.toml .
The location can be overridden with the
.B ROE_CONFIG
environment variable.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR objdump (1),
.BR readelf (1),
.BR nm (1),
.BR addr2line (1)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at
.UR https://github.com/USER/roe
the project issue tracker
.UE .
.SH AUTHORS
The roe Authors.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 2026 The roe Authors. Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0
.RB ( Apache\-2.0 ).
